             PANW - Defining AI interaction
             patterns for spreadsheet-native
             users.




             I led the end-to-end design of an AI supported sales-operations workbench by
             rethinking:
                   How we design data-dense interactive tables.
                   How AI converses with spreadsheet-native users.
                   What “source” means for internal teams.
             Problem #1
             Teams had a scattered landscape of multiple single-purpose tools built by distinct
             teams. The typical approach to consolidation involved a 15+ column table.




PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                             1
             Decisions
             I redesigned the table experience by using interactive tags as the atomic unit of
             data instead of cells, and thematically grouping them.
             To prevent monotony or excessive cognitive load, I kept the tags plain but added
             colorful iconography to signal distinct meanings.
             Outcome
             Post-launch feedback led to the cluster table becoming the default pattern for
             future table designs with multiple columns.




PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                            2
             Problem #2
             The project began with a push to bring AI into the sales workflow and specifically
             as a chatbot. The real disconnect was between the narrative form that AI takes
             and the fluency users had formed over decades of industry practice.




PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                             3
             Decisions
             By experimenting with CopilotKit, I designed tabular responses with interactive
             rows and columns to enable follow-up interactions. This allowed the users to
             engage in exploratory analysis rather than single-prompt interactions.




PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                          4
             Outcome
             Through observation, we found users using this combination as a means to
             triangulate root causes, which led me to the placeholder tagline:
             “Ask what usually takes four tools to answer.”
             In later phases, we also expanded the interaction pattern to allow context from UI
             tables to trigger new chats.
             Problem #3
             Due to conventional CUI experiences, “thinking” and “sources” were treated as an
             afterthought. However 2 observations led me to rethink these critical features.
              1. While the typical “thinking” shows a meandered path models take to reach a
                 conclusion, users needed a structured “derivation” of a response, leading with
                 the conclusion.
              2. A platform’s name does not pass as a “source” for internal teams. What’s more
                 important:
                          Which dataset within the platform?
                          When was the data last updated?




PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                             5
             Decision
             These observations led me to design Trace (renamed from ‘Derivation’)
             Trace breaks down a model’s thinking into 4–7 concrete steps, with pathways and
             timestamps for last refresh.
             Outcome
             In practice, we found that team members would snap a response and its trace
             together, and drop it in Slack threads to defend a number. The pattern became
             frequent enough that snapshotting was promoted to an enhancement.




             Lessons
             Progress lies somewhere between blind acceptance and complete dismissal.
             It was certainly uncomfortable being yet another team trying to add a chatbot with
             tiny chips that simulate “thinking” and treat citations as checkboxes. But
             acknowledging discomfort while taking action led to some of the more unique
             experiences in the application, with a lasting impact.
             The question was never “how do we add a chatbot?” but rather “what
             assumptions about the chatbot experience do we carry that will fail our users?”


PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.                             6
PANW - Defining AI interaction patterns for spreadsheet-native users.   7
