Designing AI experiences for deep analysis and traceability.




Anchored Follow-Ups help users converge on findings
                                                                        Stakeholder                   Palo Alto Networks
while avoiding the drift of long AI-generated narratives.

                                                                        Skills                        AI-assisted front-end development

Trace reimagines ‘sources’ for internal tools, while
                                                                                                      Interaction Design

reducing the cost of verification for a user.                                                         Prototyping

As part of leading the design for the sales workbench, I
                                                                        Year                          2025-26
shaped the user experience for our platform from
problem setting to front-end build.
                                                                        Role                          UX Design Lead




                                                                                                                         Context
                                                                                                                         Sales Workbench was designed as a tool to
                                                                                                                         consolidate a wide range of tools into a single

                                                                                                                         platform for account teams to manage their

                                                                                                                         Opportunities, Accounts, Telemetry, and
                                                                                                                         other sales activities. 




                                                                                                                         Along with consolidation, the leadership

                                                                                                                         wanted to incorporate an AI chatbot as a

                                                                                                                         step towards AI transition.




                            Problem

                            With the push to add AI experiences to platforms, there was a disconnect
                            between AI’s narrative exchanges and the structured, tactile interaction our
                            users knew.



                                    1    Leadership wanted to introduce an AI chatbot, but users were
                                         indifferent; they see structured UIs as their bread and butter for
                                         analysis and deep-dives.

                                   2     The effort to verify a false response continued to outweigh the
                                         benefits of AI.




                            App   roach:

                            Amid the push, it became critical to identify and classify tasks that could be
                            accomplished by AI, and ones that should not be AI-fied.




                                                                                      Speaking with Account teams across Americas, EMEA, and APJC, I
                                                                                      found different teams having mixed opinions on the introduction of

                                                                                      AI into their workflow. 





                                                                                      Consistent themes included:

                                                                                         AI is always pitched for insights, but information workers need

                                                                                         dept  h

                                                                                         It is hard to maintain focus along long chat threads           .

                                                                                         Product teams consistently try to automate parts of the work
                                                                                         that require human judgement at every step.




                            Working through abstract unknowns became a bigger focus than one-off
                            insights and reporting tasks. 


                            While AI was good at synthesizing information from multiple sources,
                            identifying patterns and converging towards a finding required structured,
                            tactile UI elements.




Prototyping and Technical Hurdles

Given limited engineering resources, introducing UI snippets into
chat responses appeared as a burden for V1. To build confidence, I
began researching generative UI. 

I built a prototype that used CopilotKit to connect chat prompts to
the user’s current UI context, then sends that context through a
Codex shim that chooses an approved React component and
returns structured data for it.

With a prototype in place, the engineering team was able to build a
more scalable solution with a forked CopilotKit repo.




                            Th   e Verification Issue:

                            As data sources are continually updated, it became essential for users to

                            understand how each response was derived. Exposing a model’s thinking did

                            not help; even smarter models tend to ‘meander’ towards a finding. 





                            The challenge wasn’t transparency, but the effort spent on verification.





                            Rather than refining a model’s thought process visibility, I explored a

                            conclusion-derivation response approach. The system responds with an

                            answer and produces a concise scannable evidence/decision trail.




                            Impact:
                            Anchored Follow-Ups:
                                                                                                                  Arc   Rate
                            Reference rows anchored to prompts allowed

                            us to measure continuity in a thread without

                            having to access user messages. We found our
                                                                                                             2     3%
                            additions leading to engagement numbers

                            over twice that of industry standard.
                                                                                         + 12pts over industry standard

                            The spike in usage also gave our team the
                                                                                                              Arc   Depth
                            push needed to speed up data engineering

                            activities to make more data sources available

                            to the AI.                                                                            4.3
                                                                                         + 12pts over industry standard
                            Trace:


                            Trace resulted in a feature request for users to
                                                                                         Snapshot Rate
                            take a snapshot of the response along with its

                            trace to drop into slack, salesforce notes, and

                            email threads. 





                            A typical response included a terse

                            conclusion, a structured data-table, which

                            combined with a clear step by step derivation

                            made for a complete set needed to begin

                            grounded discussions with peers.




                            Ta  keaway:
                            Progress begins somewhere between blind acceptance and complete
                            dismissal.


                            It was certainly uncomfortable being yet another team trying to add a
                            chatbot with tiny chips that simulate “thinking” and treat citations as
                            checkboxes. But acknowledging discomfort while taking action led to some
                            of the more unique experiences in the application, with a lasting impact.


                            The question was never “how do we add a chatbot?” but rather “what
                            assumptions do we carry about the chatbot experience that will fail our
                            users?”
